GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: Republicans
rally in Nevada for tomorrow's
caucus after
Donald Trump's big South
Carolina win this
weekend, while Democrats take on
the Palmetto
State.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead: A
temporary cease-fire
is reached for war-torn Syria
one day after
the deadliest attack yet by ISIS
kills at
least 130 people.
GWEN IFILL: Then: An empty chair
sits among
the Supreme Court justices, as
they hear cases
for the first time without the
late Justice
Antonin Scalia.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And why
scientists are turning
to elephants for hope in cancer
research.
DR. JOSHUA SCHIFFMAN, Huntsman
Cancer Institute:
It's as if these elephant cells
have said,
well, it's much safer, much
better strategy
to just kill the cell and start
over. If we
do that, there's no way that
that cell can
go on to become cancer, and that
was an aha
moment for us in the lab.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Confirmation
today that the
U.S. and Russia have agreed on
at least a
pause in the Syrian civil war.
The formal announcement came
from Washington
and Moscow, but it left unclear
just how extensive
the cease-fire might be.
Meanwhile, Syria's
President Bashar al-Assad called
a parliamentary
election for April 13. We will
have a full
report later in the program.
GWEN IFILL: In the day's other
news: Authorities
in Michigan say the man accused
in Kalamazoo,
in the killings, has admitted he
did it. Jason
Dalton faced a judge via video
link from jail
today. He was denied bail, and
didn't enter
a plea. Police say Dalton killed
six people
at random in three separate
locations Saturday
night around Kalamazoo.
The local prosecutor said today
he's acknowledged
his role, but given no reason.
JEFF GETTING, Kalamazoo County
Prosecutor:
I have described this previously
as intentional,
as deliberate, as cold. This
wasn't a -- just
a momentary lapse. This wasn't
just a crime.
There was nothing that provoked
this. There
is videotapes of these
incidences. He walked
up on these people and he shot
them.
GWEN IFILL: Dalton is a driver
for the ride-sharing
service Uber. Investigators are
checking reports
that he picked up passengers
between the attacks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Obama
administration today
defended its handling of a North
Korean call
for direct talks between the two
countries.
The Wall Street Journal had
reported that
U.S. officials agreed to talks,
without first
demanding the North give up its
nuclear program.
The White House says it insisted
the nuclear
issue be part of any talks, and
says that's
consistent with longstanding
U.S. policy.
The North refused, and, days
later, carried
out a nuclear test.
GWEN IFILL: Days of violent
protests in Northern
India may finally be coming to
an end. The
government agreed on concessions
late today.
The unrest in Haryana state has
killed at
least 19 people and cut off
water to New Delhi,
as Jonathan Miller of
Independent Television
News reports.
JONATHAN MILLER: The angry
farmers of Haryana
have taken the bull by the
horns.
Feeling hard done by, thousands
have gone
on the rampage to protest
against a lack of
prospects in a fragile new world
where many
fall through the cracks.
Paramilitary forces
were ordered to shoot looters
and rioters
on sight, and they did.
Tonight, more than 10 million
people in Delhi
have no water to drink or to
wash in because
the protesters sabotaged the
Munak canal,
which provides the capital with
most of its
water supply. The protesters
belong to the
Jat farming caste, of whom there
are 80 million
across North India, eight
million in Haryana,
the state northwest of Delhi.
They want more government jobs
and places
in state education institutions,
half of which
are ring-fenced for what the
Indian government
calls other backward classes,
traditionally
far more disadvantaged than
upper-caste Jats.
MAN (through translator): The
generation of
the Jat community is in danger
of losing out.
We are demanding hope for the
younger generation.
The government should
immediately make us
part of the quota system.
JONATHAN MILLER: After days of
negotiations,
Jat community leaders have, it
seems, a forced
capitulation. The Haryana state
minister promised
to table legislation to include
Jats in the
caste quota system.
And the federal interior
minister has ordered
that a high-level committee be
set up to address
the Jats' grievances.
GWEN IFILL: The water service is
now expected
to resume tomorrow. But it could
take days
to remove vehicles left blocking
highways
and to restore rail service.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Uganda,
international observers
were openly critical after
officials announced
the 30-year-long president has
been reelected.
They said Yoweri Museveni took
more than 60
percent of vote. But European
monitors said
he won through intimidation. The
opposition
charged fraud. And, today,
police hustled
the main challenger into a van
and took him
away. He's been arrested four
times in eight
days.
GWEN IFILL: Fiji faced a huge
cleanup today
after Tropical Cyclone Winston
blasted the
Pacific Island nation over the
weekend. The
storm struck with winds of up to
200 miles
an hour late Saturday. At least
21 people
were killed. Today, people
picked through
what's left of ruined villages,
and aid agencies
warned of a possible health
crisis.
They're worried about low-lying
areas where
crops are destroyed and water
supplies cut
off.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in this
country, U.S.
Senator Claire McCaskill has
announced that
she has breast cancer and will
take a three-week
leave of absence. The Missouri
Democrat says
in a blog post that she will be
taking treatments
in Saint Louis. She says --
quote -- "It's
a little scary," but her
prognosis is good.
GWEN IFILL: And Wall Street
started the week
on a high note, helped by an
upturn in oil
prices. The Dow Jones industrial
average gained
228 points to close at 16620.
The Nasdaq rose
66 points, and the S&P 500 added
27.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Still to come on
the "NewsHour":
Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio fight
to become Donald
Trump's biggest threat; another
fragile deal
for a cease-fire in Syria; the
Supreme Court's
first session without Justice
Scalia; and
much more.
GWEN IFILL: With one more
contest down and
one less opponent to battle, the
Republican
presidential candidates spent
the day scrambling
for the next round of votes.
Meanwhile, Hillary
Clinton expanded her lead over
Democrat Bernie
Sanders. With Jeb Bush now out
of the race,
and Trump with another solid
victory in hand,
Republicans moved to
consolidate.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
We won with everything. We won
with women.
I love the women. We won with
women.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
DONALD TRUMP: we won with men. I
would rather
win with women, to be honest. We
won with
everything, tall people, short
people, fat
people, skinny people, just won.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO (R-FL),
Presidential Candidate:
The field is narrower now, but
you still have
names to pick from, and maybe
you like a couple
of people in this race and you
are trying
to decide between us. So I'm not
here to bad-mouth
anybody else.
GOV. JOHN KASICH (R-OH),
Presidential Candidate:
Coming out of New Hampshire for
the first
time, my voice is being heard.
And, you know,
for that whole long period of
time, we couldn't
get anybody in the press to pay
attention.
And now they're finally
beginning to hear.
And now this morning, here in
Virginia, we
have about 1,000 people that
have come to
hear a voice of experience,
accomplishment.
GWEN IFILL: And then today Rubio
locked horns
with Ted Cruz after Cruz's
communications
director erroneously accused
Rubio of criticizing
the Bible. The Cruz aide, Rick
Tyler, was
fired.
So, the fight for money, for
endorsements
and for credibility is on.
And we turn to Politics Monday
with Tamara
Keith of NPR and Amy Walter of
The Cook Political
Report.
As I say every week, where to
begin?
Let's talk about the
Republicans, Amy, especially
what looks like a three-man
race.
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Yes.
This Saturday definitely
consolidated the
field in a way that we were
expecting to see
it happen after New Hampshire.
It didn't.
But with Jeb Bush dropping out
and Carson
not getting much vote, John
Kasich is still
in the race. As he noted, he
thinks he is
going to be able to pick up some
momentum
when we get out to March 1.
GWEN IFILL: And, of course, when
he gets heard,
sometimes, it's for his stumbles
as much as
for anything else.
AMY WALTER: Sometimes, it's for
his stumbles.
And the reality is, there is
just not a lot
of support there for John
Kasich.
It really is Marco Rubio now who
is getting
the so-called establishment lane
to himself.
Every minute, it seems, we're
getting another
update of another senator,
another governor,
another member of Congress
endorsing Marco
Rubio. The real question now is,
is it too
late? Did they wait too late to
consolidate
to stop Donald Trump?
GWEN IFILL: I did -- my e-mail
box, like yours,
has been full of endorsements
all day coming
from establishment, senators,
members of Congress
for Marco Rubio, but I wonder
whether the
establishment lane exists in an
election year
when Donald Trump does so well.
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Well,
and we keep wondering whether
the establishment
lane really exists.
And I think that if it were
anyone else at
the top of this field who had
won New Hampshire
and won South Carolina, we
wouldn't even be
having a discussion about who's
going to overtake
him.
GWEN IFILL: Right.
TAMARA KEITH: But it's Donald
Trump, and so
the discussion continues,
because there are
a lot of people in the
Republican Party and
in the media and everywhere else
who are like,
really? Really, this is going to
happen?
But he is, at the moment, very
much the front-runner.
He's running a very
unconventional campaign.
We're now getting into a part of
the race
where it becomes more of a
national campaign
than a state-by-state,
hand-by-hand kind of
race, and he's been running that
kind of campaign
all along.
AMY WALTER: Though I would
argue, if it were
any other candidate who had
negatives as high
as Donald Trump does, which
right now among
all voters, his very negatives
are at 50 percent,
he is the most polarizing
candidate in the
Republican field now that Jeb
Bush is gone.
He was the second most
polarizing, most polarizing
in the field.
There is still a lot of angst
among Republicans
about having him at the top.
GWEN IFILL: But think about this
for a moment.
Today's little dust-up between
Ted Cruz and
Marco Rubio, who did that help
in the end?
It helps Donald Trump, right?
AMY WALTER: Yes. Absolutely.
GWEN IFILL: Because Donald Trump
gets to stand
by while they fight each other.
TAMARA KEITH: And he tweeted
about it gleefully.
AMY WALTER: Yes, thank you for
doing that.
In fact, when you look at the
amount of money
that is being spent on attack
ads, the lion's
share of it has gone actually to
attack Marco
Rubio. Very little money has
been spent going
after Donald Trump, at least in
the paid media.
And certainly we don't see it
all that much
even on the debate stage. We see
a little
skirmish, but there's not been a
concerted
effort.
GWEN IFILL: And if there were?
AMY WALTER: And that's what a
lot of people
are wondering.
And here's what I -- I had to
write this down,
but I think there are three R's
right now
going on with the Republicans
writ large,
resignation, reluctance,
rationalization.
All of that is, they're sort of
in some ways
resigned to, well, maybe Trump
can win because
it seems like we can't figure
out a way to
beat him, a reluctance to really
challenge
him, as I said, not a lot of
money been spent
going after him, especially by
outside groups,
and rationalization, this idea
that, well,
maybe Trump won't be that bad,
maybe he could
be a general election candidate.
After all, Hillary Clinton is
really vulnerable.
After all, she could be
indicted. And, look,
he's bringing out all these new
voters. But
they're forgetting that a
general election
looks a whole lot different than
a primary.
GWEN IFILL: A word about Jeb
Bush. What happened?
When we sat here a year ago, we
were talking
about how he was clearly ahead.
He raised
tons of money, and yet he's
completely out
of the race.
TAMARA KEITH: And I think he
said it best,
which is that he heard the
voters,and the
voters told him that they just
didn't -- they
didn't want what he was selling.
And I think what he was selling
is a brand
of establishment politics. He is
the insider's
insider. He had all of that
money, and voters
are attracted to a guy who says
he can't be
bought.
GWEN IFILL: Well, speaking of
someone who
says he can't be bought, let's
talk about
Bernie Sanders, who didn't have
a good weekend,
and now is trying to come up
with a strategy
which looks like it's more about
delegate-picking
than anything else.
AMY WALTER: The challenge for
Bernie Sanders
is that the delegate system that
the Democrats
have is actually incredibly
helpful for underdogs,
and it makes it -- it's supposed
to make it
harder for somebody like Hillary
Clinton,
an establishment candidate, to
build up a
big lead, because delegates are
awarded proportionately.
You can win a state by a million
votes.
You still only get a certain
number of delegates.
The challenge for Bernie Sanders
right now
is that he hasn't done well
enough in the
states he should be doing well
in, that he's
not building a delegate lead.
And so the math
is going to start to get really
difficult
for him, because, if he keeps
losing states
that look like Nevada, South
Carolina, a lot
of these Southern states, he
can't just make
it up by running the table in
some other states.
GWEN IFILL: And, in fact, when
he talks about
running the table in states like
Minnesota,
and Colorado, Massachusetts,
Vermont, he doesn't
even say -- he says that I have
a shot there.
AMY WALTER: Right.
GWEN IFILL: Let's talk about
Hillary Clinton,
though. She's already
leapfrogged ahead to
Texas, even though Saturday -- I
mean, even
though this week is South
Carolina.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes. Yes.
And she flew directly from
Nevada to Texas.
Texas is the biggest delegate
prize on Super
Tuesday, and she's also playing
a delegate
game and she wants to maximize
the delegates
where she can get them in places
like Texas.
She expects to do very well in
South Carolina.
She has a strong lead among
African-Americans,
and the entrance polls in Nevada
are very
good news for her on that front,
because she
absolutely dominated among
African-Americans.
The story isn't quite as clear
with Latino
voters. It seems as though she
and Bernie
Sanders split Latino voters.
GWEN IFILL: But I do remember
that the Clintons
have spent a lot of time. In
fact, Bill Clinton
has spent a lot of time on the
ground in Texas
over the years, and so the
groundwork has
been laid there.
AMY WALTER: Absolutely.
GWEN IFILL: Does Bernie Sanders
-- did he
ever get the young voter turnout
that he was
counting on?
TAMARA KEITH: That's the big
issue here.
Bernie Sanders talks about
building a revolution.
And the revolution is smaller
than the revolution
that Barack Obama built. The
voter turnout
in Iowa and New Hampshire and
now in Nevada
is not nearly as high as it was
in 2008. But,
in 2008, you had Barack Obama
vs. Hillary
Clinton. I mean, it's historic.
It's a fight
for the ages.
This time around, Bernie Sanders
has huge
enthusiasm, but Republicans are
turning out
more voters than Democrats. And
that has to
be a worry for Democrats heading
into the
general election.
AMY WALTER: In fact, if you even
dig further
into the turnout numbers, what
you see is
that people who are under the
age of 30 are
a smaller percent than they were
in 2008,
and people who are over the age
of 65 are
a bigger percent than they were
in 2008.
She does much better with older
voters. He
does much better with younger
voters. So,
it becomes something of a wash.
GWEN IFILL: You begin to see
their path.
AMY WALTER: That's right.
GWEN IFILL: Amy Walter of Cook
Political Report,
Tamara Keith of NPR, thank you
all.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
AMY WALTER: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Syria's civil war
has ground
on for almost five years, but
this day saw
a diplomatic step that could
begin the process
of ending a conflict that's
killed 250,000
people and displaced millions
more.
Chief foreign affairs
correspondent Margaret
Warner begins our coverage.
MARGARET WARNER: Syrian
government forces
and rebel groups battled
furiously through
the weekend. But some of the
shooting is supposed
to stop this Saturday. Official
word came
after President Obama spoke to
Russian President
Vladimir Putin by phone.
White House spokesman Josh
Earnest:
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary:
It will require all of the
parties who signed
onto this document to follow
through on the
commitments that they have made.
The whole
world can see in writing what
everyone has
committed to, and it's time for
the signatories
to step up and for the bloodshed
to come to
an end.
MARGARET WARNER: And from
Moscow, Putin called
it a real chance to stop the
violence.
Secretary of State John Kerry
had initially
announced a provisional
agreement yesterday,
after long-distance discussions
with Russian
Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov.
The plan does
allow for continuing U.S. and
Russian airstrikes
against the Islamic State group,
Jabhat al-Nusra,
and -- quote -- "other terrorist
organizations
designated by the U.N. Security
Council."
That last phrase will be key,
since the Russians
regard nearly all groups
fighting the Syrian
government as terrorists. It's
also unclear
if the various fighting factions
will actually
go along with the cease-fire.
Still, U.N. officials expressed
cautious optimism.
STEPHANE DUJARRIC, Spokesman,
Office of the
U.N. Secretary-General: It is a
long-awaited
signal of hope to the Syrian
people that after
five years of conflict, there
may be an end
to their suffering in sight.
Much work now
lies ahead to ensure the
implementation.
MARGARET WARNER: There's also
hope that a
cease-fire will allow for the
quick relaunch
of peace talks between the
government and
opposition groups. But, for now,
there is
no respite. Islamic State
bombings in Homs
and a Damascus suburb yesterday
killed 130
people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Margaret
Warner joins me
now.
So, Margaret, what did it take
to get this
deal?
MARGARET WARNER: Well, U.S.
officials believe
it took two things, one, that
Vladimir Putin
had decided he got most of what
he wanted
on the ground. He shored up
Assad enough.
The Assad military can handle
things. They
have taken back some territory
from both ISIS
and from the moderate
opposition, and that
he doesn't want to get sucked
into the quagmire.
The second thing that was
epitomized in the
phone call today is Putin wanted
to be seen
here as a partner to the United
States in
resolving the conflict in Syria.
And he wasn't
even a player last September
before he sent
in troops. So it's not bad work
in five months
that he is now co-chairing this
group with
President Obama.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How confident,
having said
that, is the United States that
this is actually
going to work?
MARGARET WARNER: Well, Judy, I
have to say
one official said to me today no
one's doing
high-fives around here. And
another one said,
after Ukraine, we don't
necessarily believe
anything.
But the key concession, I'm
told, that Putin
has made is that he will no
longer take Assad's
pretext for bombing the moderate
opposition.
As we said in the setup, what he
has been
doing is accepting Assad's
definition of terrorists,
and so even the moderate
opposition supported
by the U.S. was being pounded by
Russian military,
and that if you look at the
language of the
document, it now says you can
pound away at
ISIS, the al-Nusra Front or
other groups designated
terrorists by the U.N., and that
actually
means something.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, Margaret,
why has this
been so hard to get?
MARGARET WARNER: Oh.
Well, Judy, the big problem is,
you know,
there are so many players, not
only on the
ground in Syria, but that
everyone has a different
mentor, a different benefactor,
all with different
aims. So, for the U.S., number
one is getting
rid of ISIS. For the Russians,
number one
was getting -- shoring up their
client state
Syria.
For all the Gulf states, with
the Saudis in
the lead, number one was getting
rid of Assad.
And for the Turks, number one
was undercutting
the Turkish Kurdish fighters
whom they see
as cousins to their own
terrorist Kurds, the
PKK. And so when you have a
group like that,
they have always known that
they're never
going to get the parties on the
ground to
agree to this.
It had to come from the big
boys, the 17-member
group. But when they couldn't
agree on what
the objective was, that's why
it's been so
very difficult.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, as you point
out, so many
different interests from so many
different
directions.
Even so, there's been just
steady criticism
that the administration hasn't
done enough,
that so many people have been
killed, millions
displaced from Syria. How does
the administration
handle that?
MARGARET WARNER: Well, you're
right, Judy,
not only tremendous criticism,
but that the
United States was being played
by the Russians,
that the Russians got themselves
in there
promising help to defeat ISIS,
and instead
used it to pound away at Assad's
adversaries.
Their answer -- well, Secretary
Kerry got
a little irritated this weekend
and said,
well, I have not heard any
alternatives from
anyone else.
Now, there are alternatives, but
we will leave
that aside. Their answer is we
believe the
only way to defeat ISIS, which
is our number
one objective, is end the
conflict in Syria.
Number two, we work for a
president who is
not willing to put in any more
military muscle.
We are now supporting the
moderate opposition
somewhat, but nothing serious,
no surface-to-air
missiles to shoot down planes,
nothing like
that.
And so really talking is the
only -- getting
all the parties together and
trying to get
to a political resolution was
the only way
to go. But a senior White House
official said
to me last week, you know, if
this -- this
is really a turning point. If
this doesn't
work, I don't know where we go.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we will see
where it
develops.
MARGARET WARNER: We will see if
it goes anywhere.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, if it does,
a huge development.
MARGARET WARNER: Huge, if it
does.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Margaret Warner,
thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us, coming
up on the
"NewsHour": what a British exit
from the E.U.
would mean for global stability;
why elephants
are largely immune to cancer;
and a poet's
tribute to his father and his
photographs.
But, first, the Supreme Court
returned to
the bench today, absent Justice
Antonin Scalia.
In a tribute read from the
bench, Chief Justice
John Roberts noted that Scalia,
who passed
a way a little over a week ago,
authored 282
majority opinions for the court.
"He was also known, on occasion,
to dissent.
We remember his incisive
intellect, his agile
wit, and his captivating prose.
But we cannot
forget his irrepressible spirit.
He was our
man for all seasons, and we
shall miss him
beyond measure."
Marcia Coyle of "The National
Law Journal"
was in the courtroom today, and
she joins
me now.
It was a somber mood in that
courtroom, in
that chamber.
MARCIA COYLE, "The National Law
Journal":
It was. It was, Gwen.
It was subdued. And I think,
throughout the
court -- I can't speak for
everyone who works
within the court -- but it was
somber, but
I think there also was a sense
of fatigue,
because it was a very emotional
week for everyone.
Relationships among the justices
are long
and good. And the relationships
between justices
and court employees are also
close.
If you walk through the court
building after
hours, there is a sense of real
family. They
consider it a family-type
institution. I thought
the chief justice hit the right
note inside
the courtroom. He was respectful
of Justice
Scalia's background, education,
family and
also had a few little light
notes in there.
GWEN IFILL: That little comment
about the
dissents.
MARCIA COYLE: Occasionally in
dissent to remind
us of how he was on and off the
bench.
GWEN IFILL: He also mentioned
that he only
argued one case before the court
and won it,
so he had a perfect record.
MARCIA COYLE: Exactly. Exactly.
So -- but it was very much
business as usual
when the court took up two cases
this morning.
There were just, I think, as
many questions
from those justices who
typically question,
but what was really missing was
kind of the
spark, the color that Justice
Scalia brought
to his own questions.
GWEN IFILL: Well, as the court
was having
their discussions about -- first
of all, explain
briefly what those two cases
were.
MARCIA COYLE: Sure.
Ironically, these cases seemed
tailor-made
for Justice Scalia. The first
one involved
interpreting a federal law that
mandates that
a preference be given to
veteran-owned small
businesses by the Department of
Veterans Affairs
when it awards contracts. And so
the language
of the statute, Justice Scalia
was a bear
about textualism. If the words
are clear,
that ends the discussion.
And I had a feeling almost that
Justice Kagan
was channeling her inner Scalia
during the
arguments as she focused on the
words of the
statute and pressed the
government's lawyer,
aren't you following it? It
seems pretty clear
to me that the statute, when it
uses the word
shall means shall.
The second case was a Fourth
Amendment case.
And he had written often in
Fourth Amendment
cases, very protective of the
privacy of individuals
in their person, their homes and
their documents.
And this case involved an
illegal stop of
someone by a police officer who
then did an
arrest warrant check, found
there was an arrest
warrant, arrested the person he
stopped, and
searched him.
And the question was whether the
evidence
that he found of drugs could be
suppressed
because the initial stop was
illegal, there
was no reasonable suspicion. So,
both cases
really played, I think, to
Justice Scalia's
interests.
GWEN IFILL: Yes. So, while the
justices were
going about business of court,
right across
the street, in Congress, they
were beginning
what you have lived through
before and covered
before, which is the motions you
go through
to actually fill that vacancy.
And we saw members of the Senate
go to the
floor and praise Justice Scalia,
but also
begin to lay the groundwork for
the drama
that is going to begin.
MARCIA COYLE: Right.
GWEN IFILL: Does any of that
seep into the
court building itself, any of
that political
drama?
MARCIA COYLE: Not really.
I think the justices and the
employees are
very aware of what's going on. I
think even
some of them have a feeling that
they would
like to see this get on, get
done with. But,
no, they're really unaffected by
the politics.
The court does its work, and
today did its
work as it has always done,
whether it's with
eight -- nine justices, eight
justices, or
seven justices, and will
continue to work
through the end of the term.
GWEN IFILL: The White House put
out a photograph
this week of the president
walking down the
Colonnade at the White House
carrying a great,
big briefcase folder, so clearly
to show that
somebody is hard at work.
But both sides have done an
interesting thing
and over the years. And that is
to say, this
president, whoever he is, if
it's an election
year, shouldn't have a say in
this. And today
emerged a video of Joe Biden,
who is now the
vice president, of course, at
the time the
Senate Judiciary Committee
chairman, saying
the same thing in 1992.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: A little different.
MARCIA COYLE: 1992. Yes, 1992,
there was no
vacancy. It was an election
year.
So, I would imagine -- I'm not
in Vice President
Biden's head, but I imagine
there was a concern
that there might be a vacancy.
It was June.
And in June, politicians' eyes
turn to the
Supreme Court. They always
wonder if there's
going to be retirements,
resignations.
This, to me is typical partisan
back-and-forth
and is probably not all that
helpful. But
there have been many discussions
over the
years on how to improve the
confirmation process.
This is one that he was offering
in '92, no
election year confirmations.
There have been
others, you know, term limits,
and we're going
to continue to see this.
GWEN IFILL: Well, there's one
more confirmation
battle for you to cover there,
Marcia.
MARCIA COYLE: We will see, won't
we?
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: Marcia Coyle of
"National Law
Journal," thank you.
MARCIA COYLE: My pleasure, Gwen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The United
Kingdom has been
a part of the European Union for
more than
40 years. But its place in that
postwar attempt
at European integration is now
in question,
and whether Britain will stay or
go is a hotly-contested
issue that will soon go before
British voters.
DAVID CAMERON, British Prime
Minister: I have
no other agenda than what is
best for our
country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It was a
high-stakes moment,
the British leader appealing to
the House
of Commons, and to the country
at large, not
to bolt from the European Union.
DAVID CAMERON: Our current trade
agreements
with 53 countries around the
world would lapse.
This cannot be described as
anything other
than risk, uncertainty, and a
leap in the
dark that could hurt working
people in our
country for years to come.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Cameron
said the deal
he struck with 27 other E.U.
nations on Friday
grants Britain special status.
It includes
measures to ensure Britain won't
be forced
into becoming part of a European
super-state.
It also creates safeguards for
Britain's financial
services and the pound currency.
And it grants
London the power to limit
welfare payments
to migrants from the rest of
Europe.
Cameron is depending on that
deal to win over
doubters in his own Conservative
Party. But
the effort was dealt a major
blow yesterday
when London's popular mayor and
fellow Conservative
Boris Johnson came out in favor
of leaving
the E.U., what's become known as
the Brexit.
BORIS JOHNSON, Mayor of London:
I will be
advocating vote leave or
whatever the team
is called. And I understand
there are many
of them. I think that is
basically -- because
I want a better deal for the
people of this
country, to save them money and
to take back
control.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Johnson's
announcement could
increase the odds that Britons
will vote to
leave the E.U. in a June
referendum. But opinions
were decidedly mixed on the
streets of London.
WOMAN: We'd be just better off
on our own.
I think, you know, we have been
an island
for a long time, and I don't
think we need
to rely on other people.
MAN: Europe protects our
employment rights,
our human rights and maybe they
keep our government
in control.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Leaders of other
E.U. member
nations, including Italian Prime
Minister
Matteo Renzi, also criticized a
possible exit.
MATTEO RENZI, Italian Prime
Minister (through
translator): The consequences
would be worse
for British citizens than for
European ones.
We hope this will not happen,
but were I to
make a forecast, if Great
Britain leaves,
the main problem will be for the
U.K., its
businesses and its citizens.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The uncertainty
over Britain's
future in the bloc has already
taken a toll.
The British pound's value fell
more than 2
percent today.
With me now to discuss the
political battle
of Britain's possible exit from
the European
Union and its implications is
Steven Erlanger.
He's the London bureau chief for
The New York
Times.
Steve Erlanger, thank you for
joining us.
Why, after decades of being part
of the E.U.,
are so many Britons looking to
leave it?
STEVEN ERLANGER, The New York
Times: Well,
we still don't know how many are
really looking
to leave it. Certainly, there's
a big portion
of the Conservative Party which
has wanted
to leave it probably ever since
Britain joined
it.
In 1975, 41 years ago, there was
a similar
referendum which passed by,
like, two-thirds
to one-third to join it. But
ever since Margaret
Thatcher demanded her money
back, John Major
had lots of trouble with the
Conservative
Party angry about Brussels,
angry about what
they perceived to be loss of
sovereignty.
And to manage his own party,
David Cameron
thought he should promise them
this referendum,
this in-or-out referendum on
Brussels, if
he won power again. Well, lo and
behold, even
to his surprise, he won a
majority, so he
sort of caught himself and felt
that he had
to make good on his promise and
hold this
in-or-out referendum.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So what are the
main arguments
today for leaving the E.U.?
STEVEN ERLANGER: Well, some of
them are historical
and nostalgic. Britain is an
island that was
an empire. It's never been fully
European,
but it's too close to Europe to
escape it,
too.
It was very much engaged in the
great European
wars, but it won them, and so it
has a different
sense of its own sovereignty
than, let's say,
France or Germany, or Belgium,
which understand
that sovereignty can be
vulnerable.
And Britain isn't -- it's an
Anglo-Saxon country.
It has a different notion of
laws. It's not
the Napoleonic code. So that's
one thing.
And the second thing is the
British sense
of sovereignty. They feel
Parliament really
must be sovereign, and the
people who want
to leave feel Brussels
interferes too much
in the operations of British
laws and British
justice.
And the third major issue, which
is an odd
one, really, is immigration,
because when
you're part of the E.U., you
have to guarantee
freedom of movement and freedom
of working
for every citizen of the E.U. So
they're worried
about their jobs.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, quickly, what
are the main
arguments in the other direction
that Britain
should stay in, and who's making
them?
STEVEN ERLANGER: Well, the main
lessons are,
Britain is part of Europe, it's
inescapable,
even the wars show that.
Britain's security is guaranteed
by being
part of this larger group.
Britain's trade
is heavily toward the European
Union. At least
a million Britons also take
advantage of this
freedom of movement and freedom
of labor and
live inside Europe. And the city
of London,
which is a big financial center,
benefits
more from being inside the E.U.
than not.
There are a lot of companies who
are based
in Britain because they want to
be part of
the E.U., but also favor British
labor laws.
So, if Britain leaves, the great
worry is
some of those companies will
leave, that there
will be capital flight, that
Britain's security
will be diminished. And, also,
the Americans
have been very clear about
wanting Britain
to stay in.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's
exactly what I wanted
to pick up on. What is it felt
is the U.S.'
stake in all this?
STEVEN ERLANGER: Well, the U.S.
is not being
altruistic.
The U.S. sees Britain as a great
ally, and
it wants its great ally inside
the European
Union, which has a big effect,
frankly, on
global trade regulations, on
data privacy
regulations. And the U.S. feels,
with its
ally Britain, it has more
influence inside
the European Union than it would
otherwise.
And, also, Britain is a big
military power
with France, and it's good to
have Britain
not just inside NATO, but inside
the European
Union itself.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, I guess
you're looking
for a lively debate for the next
four months.
STEVEN ERLANGER: Well, it's
going to be lively,
partly because what's added
spice is, now
the Conservative leadership is
at stake, because
Boris Johnson, the mayor of
London, who's
always considered slightly
buffoonish, but
also very popular and a possible
prime minister,
has broken with David Cameron,
and is favoring
exit, while Cameron wants to
stay inside.
And Cameron's quite angry with
Johnson, but
Johnson, I think, sees it as his
best chance
of becoming prime minister down
the road.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Drama at every
level.
Steven Erlanger with The New
York Times, we
thank you.
STEVEN ERLANGER: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: big hopes in
the fight
against cancer and the potential
for some
surprising allies: elephants.
Special correspondent Jackie
Judd reports
on researchers thinking outside
the box.
MAN: The Ringling Bros. and
Barnum & Bailey
performing pachyderms!
JACKIE JUDD: This spring, all of
these circus
elephants will be permanently
retired. But
as they leave the center ring,
they are taking
center stage in another unlikely
place, the
Huntsman Cancer Institute in
Salt Lake City.
DR. JOSHUA SCHIFFMAN, Huntsman
Cancer Institute:
Just about every person I met
who heard about
this would come up and ask,
elephants, cancer,
what's the connection?
JACKIE JUDD: The possible
connection is a
work in progress, led by
pediatric oncologist
Dr. Joshua Schiffman.
WOMAN: Insert the needle into
the vein.
JACKIE JUDD: He has enlisted the
support of
the Ringling Bros. Center for
Elephant Conservation
in Florida and the Hogle Zoo in
Salt Lake
to draw blood from these sturdy
mammals for
his experiments.
Logically, elephants should get
cancer far
more often than we do. They have
100 times
the cells than humans,
therefore, much more
opportunity for those cells to
mutate into
cancer. But that's not the case.
Less than
5 percent of elephant deaths are
attributed
to cancer.
DR. JOSHUA SCHIFFMAN: Elephants
have had 55
million years of evolution to
figure out how
to avoid cancer. Now it's our
turn to take
a page out of nature's playbook,
and try to
figure out, how do we help our
patients and
families with cancer?
JACKIE JUDD: Most humans have
two copies of
a gene called p53. When
everything is working,
the protein in p53 is a
cancer-suppressor,
repairing or killing mutant
cells so they
don't multiply. Elephants have
40 copies of
p53.
DR. JOSHUA SCHIFFMAN: This is
our tissue culture
room. This is where we actually
do the experiments
to try to understand, how does
elephant p53
work? In here are the actual
cells growing.
JACKIE JUDD: After bombarding
elephant blood
with radiation, Dr. Schiffman
and his team
stood back and observed how the
elephant p53
responded to the damaged cells.
The answer,
recently published in "The
Journal of the
American Medical Association,"
was that the
multiple genes responded far
more robustly
than p53's response in humans.
DR. JOSHUA SCHIFFMAN: Instead of
trying to
repair themselves, the elephant
cells, many
of them, all went on to cell
death, to this
cell suicide, or what we call
apoptosis.
It's as if these elephant cells
have said,
well, it's much safer, much
better strategy
to just kill the cell and start
over. If we
do that, there's no way that
that cell can
go on to become cancer, and that
was an aha
moment for us in the lab. We're
trying to
learn how to get kids better
with cancer without
making them sick.
JACKIE JUDD: Now the research
has turned to
this question: How does elephant
p53 respond
in human cancer cells? And could
it stop the
disease cold? Could it be a
treatment to prevent
cancer or halt its growth?
DR. JOSHUA SCHIFFMAN: In here
are three breast
cancers from different
individuals that have
been growing in the labs. And we
take the
elephant p53 and transfect it.
We put it into
the breast cancer cell lines,
and we wait
and we see, will the elephant
p53 kill these
breast cancer cells?
JACKIE JUDD: The research, and
where it may
lead, would be especially
meaningful for people
like Tony Means. He and others
with a genetic
disorder called Li-Fraumeni
Syndrome have
only one p53 gene, instead of
two, leaving
them virtually defenseless
against cancer.
In your family, your mother had
Li-Fraumeni,
died very young.
TONY MEANS, Cancer Patient: Yes,
ma'am.
JACKIE JUDD: You have aunts and
uncles who
have cancer and have
Li-Fraumeni.
TONY MEANS: Yes, a good chunk of
our family.
I would say a majority,
JACKIE JUDD: And they have all
been tested?
They have...
(CROSSTALK)
TONY MEANS: Well, every single
one has been
Li-Fraumeni.
JACKIE JUDD: Means is being
treated for cancer
and 6-year-old daughter Emma is
being watched
by Dr. Schiffman because of a
small brain
tumor. Two other children with
Li-Fraumeni
are frequently screened, and the
family takes
part in Dr. Schiffman's research
in any way
they can.
TONY MEANS: I have kind of put
hope in him
by choosing to have children,
knowing that
there's a chance they could have
the gene.
JACKIE JUDD: But you understand
this is years
off, if ever.
TONY MEANS: Oh, yes, yes.
JACKIE JUDD: If ever.
TONY MEANS: Oh, yes, yes, yes,
yes. Who knows?
JACKIE JUDD: And that is where
Avi Schroeder
comes in. Dr. Schroeder of
Technion, the Israel
Institute of Technology, joined
the research
several months ago, with the
goal of developing
a drug for humans that would
mimic the elephant's
robust p53.
AVI SCHROEDER, Technion: Now
there's a delivery
issue. How can we get that
protein to the
disease site, into the cancer
cells, to act
and to perform the therapeutic
activity on
site? We're going to wrap the
proteins inside
a nanoparticle, and they will
release the
protein inside the cancer cells.
JACKIE JUDD: And if everything
works, the
cancer cell will be killed?
AVI SCHROEDER: Yes, the cancer
cell will go
into a death cycle after that,
yes.
MAN: We are excited to have Dr.
Schroeder
here.
JACKIE JUDD: The team of
optimists believes
clinical trials could begin in
three years.
Not surprisingly, there is
skepticism in the
medical community, and that is
shared by Dr.
Lee Helman, the head of clinical
research
at the National Cancer
Institute.
DR. LEE HELMAN, National Cancer
Institute:
The whole idea of putting an
elephant gene
that's regulated in a unique way
into a human
being, when we have had enough
trouble putting
human genes into human beings
with all kinds
of difficulty, I would say he
has got a lot
of hurdles to overcome.
JACKIE JUDD: But Dr. Helman does
believe there
is value to this deeper
investigation into
p53.
DR. LEE HELMAN: I think his
finding only lends
further evidence to support that
hypothesis
that p53 function, and
understanding it and
being able to regulate it, would
be a major
step forward in our ability to
treat cancer.
JACKIE JUDD: Cancer touches
almost every family,
directly or indirectly. For
families like
the Means, it is a certainty.
So, what is happening in this
lab, at this
zoo, could be life- changing.
Have you taken the kids to the
zoo to see
the elephants?
TONY MEANS: Yes. Oh, man, that
was awesome.
The kids loved it, and it was
kind of fun
for me to sit there as a father
and just look
at them. This is the answer in
their lifetime.
That's all I want is for my kids
to have that.
And this -- this gives them
hope.
DR. JOSHUA SCHIFFMAN: I don't
promise my patients
it will happen, because I don't
want to have
them disappointed. But if I
didn't believe
this would work, I wouldn't be
trying it.
JACKIE JUDD: Dr. Schiffman
concedes that turning
to elephants for a cancer
treatment is outside
the box, but that, he says, is
often where
the best answers are found.
This is Jackie Judd for the "PBS
NewsHour"
in Salt Lake City.
GWEN IFILL: Next: A poet honors
his father,
and both honor their Puerto
Rican heritage.
Jeffrey Brown has the story.
JEFFREY BROWN: A community
organizer in a
burned-out building, a young
girl taking a
ballet lesson, photographs of
Puerto Rican
life in New York and around the
country. They
were taken by a man named Frank
Espada, who
died in 2014 at age 83.
MARTIN ESPADA, "Vivas to Those
Who Have Failed":
He lived many lives. And he
evolved from someone
who was working in the streets
of East New
York, where I grew up, to
someone who was
documenting the condition of an
entire people.
JEFFREY BROWN: What's it like
seeing your
father's work in the
Smithsonian?
MARTIN ESPADA: Surreal.
JEFFREY BROWN: Martin Espada,
Frank's son,
is an award-winning poet, a
former tenant
lawyer, and longtime professor
at the University
of Massachusetts.
His new volume, "Vivas to Those
Who Have Failed"
-- the title comes from a line
by Walt Whitman
-- is filled with poems that
remember and
celebrate his father.
MARTIN ESPADA: "I am the
archaeologist. I
sift the shards of you,
cufflinks, passports
photos, a button from the March
on Washington
with a black hand shaking a
white hand, letters
in Spanish, your birth
certificate from a
town high in the mountains."
The poetry about my father is
both elegiac
and documentary. Poets often in
these situations
perform the function of
preachers, right?
People expect you to say
something meaningful
in this age where language has
become divorced
from meaning and we live in a
time of hyper-euphemism.
JEFFREY BROWN: But you're a
storyteller. You
have got this public role as a
poet, but most
of all, at that moment, you're a
son.
MARTIN ESPADA: Yes, first and
foremost, and
I was feeling that as a son.
And it's an undercurrent of
loss, of grief,
and grappling with grief, and
trying to see
the ways in which poetry might
be able to
heal grief, if not for me, then
for somebody
else.
JEFFREY BROWN: In his poems,
Martin refers
back to old home movies that
show his father,
a man who'd come to New York
from Puerto Rico
as a boy in 1939, and was an
athlete who played
semi-pro baseball.
While serving in the Air Force
in 1949, he
was jailed for a week in
Mississippi for not
giving up going to the back of
the bus.
MARTIN ESPADA: He said it was
the best week
of his life.
JEFFREY BROWN: The best week?
MARTIN ESPADA: The best week of
his life,
because he figured out what to
do with the
rest of it.
JEFFREY BROWN: Frank Espada
would become a
community organizer. He founded
East New York
Action in the early 1960s, and
worked in the
civil rights movement.
MARTIN ESPADA: There's little
attention paid,
up to this point, to what we
might call the
Latino civil rights movement.
JEFFREY BROWN: Above all, says
Martin, who
sometimes worked with his
father, he was an
artist who documented what he
saw. Frank Espada
published a book in 2006 titled
"The Puerto
Rican Diaspora: Themes in the
Survival of
a People," and his photographic
work has been
collected by the Smithsonian
American Art
Museum, where Martin and I met
recently.
MARTIN ESPADA: I remember this
one. This is
a photograph that was taken in
Hartford. At
first glance, this appears to be
a photograph
of three kids on the street.
And, indeed,
it is that.
But if you look more closely to
the right,
you will see a notice for a
foreclosure sale
on those premises. And that is
very much a
part of what my father is saying
in that photograph.
JEFFREY BROWN: In a poem titled
"Mad Love,"
Martin Espada refers to specific
photographs,
as a way of addressing what his
father will
no longer see.
MARTIN ESPADA: "Not the poet in
a beret grinning
at the vision of shoes for all
the shoeless
people on the earth, not the
dancer hearing
the piano tell her to spin and
spin again,
not the grave digger and his
machete, the
bandanna that keeps the dust of
the dead from
coating his tongue, not the
union organizer,
spirits floating in the smoke of
his victory
cigar, not the addict in rehab
gazing at herself
like a fortuneteller gazing at
the cards,
not the face half-hidden by the
star in the
Puerto Rican flag, the darkness
of his dissident's
eye.
"Now that my father cannot
speak, they wait
their turn to testify in his
defense, witnesses
to the mad love that drove him
to it."
JEFFREY BROWN: You say in last
lines here,
"Now that my father cannot
speak."
MARTIN ESPADA: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: You feel a
responsibility to
speak?
MARTIN ESPADA: Absolutely.
My father is gone. He can never
utter another
word. He can never snap another
photograph.
That's over. And so now comes my
turn. Now
I must speak for him. And now
those faces,
the faces he documented, also
speak for him.
JEFFREY BROWN: From the
Smithsonian American
Art Museum, I'm Jeffrey Brown
for the "PBS
NewsHour."
GWEN IFILL: You can find Martin
Espada's full
reading of "Mad Love" on our
Poetry page.
That's on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight,
our "NewsHour"
Shares, something that caught
our eye that
might be of interest to you,
too.
One-hundred-and-six-year-old
Virginia McLaurin
never thought she would live to
see a black
president in the White House.
When she was
honored for her volunteer work
in Washington,
D.C., two years ago, she said
her dream was
to meet President Obama. After
an online campaign,
McLaurin was able to fulfill her
dream, and
even dance with the president
and first lady.
The White House shared the
moment in this
video it released on social
media.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Virginia McLaurin?
VIRGINIA MCLAURIN, Volunteer:
Hi!
BARACK OBAMA: How are you?
VIRGINIA MCLAURIN: I'm fine.
BARACK OBAMA: Oh, it's so nice
to see you.
VIRGINIA MCLAURIN: It's an
honor. It's an
honor.
BARACK OBAMA: You want to say hi
to Michelle?
VIRGINIA MCLAURIN: Yes!
BARACK OBAMA: Slow down now.
Don't go too
quick. She's 106!
MICHELLE OBAMA, First Lady: No,
you are not.
You are not 106.
BARACK OBAMA: Well, you got to
-- you, slow
down.
MICHELLE OBAMA: Oh, my goodness.
VIRGINIA MCLAURIN: Thank you.
MICHELLE OBAMA: You are not -- I
want to be
like you when I grow up.
VIRGINIA MCLAURIN: You can.
(LAUGHTER)
BARACK OBAMA: She's dancing.
Come on.
So, what's the secret to still
dancing at
106?
VIRGINIA MCLAURIN: Just keep
moving. I am
so happy.
MICHELLE OBAMA: We are happy to
have you.
VIRGINIA MCLAURIN: A black
president.
MICHELLE OBAMA: Look at him,
right there.
VIRGINIA MCLAURIN: A black wife.
MICHELLE OBAMA: That's me.
VIRGINIA MCLAURIN: Yes.
(LAUGHTER)
VIRGINIA MCLAURIN: And I'm here
to celebrate
black history.
BARACK OBAMA: That's exactly
right.
VIRGINIA MCLAURIN: Yes. That's
what I'm here
for.
BARACK OBAMA: Well, we're glad
to have you
here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I want to know
what her secret
is.
GWEN IFILL: I have watched that
a dozen times,
and I crack up laughing at
Virginia McLaurin
every single time. She's
fabulous.
JUDY WOODRUFF: She absolutely
is.
GWEN IFILL: On "Independent
Lens" tonight:
a look at the tangled Web
between an FBI informant,
his targets, and government
efforts to protect
the U.S. homeland. "Terror"
tells the story
of a 62-year old Black Panther
turned counterterrorism
informant, caught between the
competing narratives
of FBI officials who believe
targets may be
a potential jihadist threat and
the targets
themselves who deny supporting
Islamic extremism.
MAN: They call me to do an
assignment in Pittsburgh.
Whatever the case may be, if
they want me
to do surveillance, I'm going to
do it, you
know? I need the money. I need
the money.
I mean, these are just -- these
are all targets
in suspected areas. For some of
these, they
have got a big population of
Muslims that
come from the various countries
over there
to come to school here,
Moroccans, Somalis,
Iranians, Saudis. And then they
all go back
to where they come from.
I don't have no feelings for
them. They're
making Islam look bad. You got
to go.
GWEN IFILL: "Independent lens"
airs tonight
on most PBS stations.
On the "NewsHour" online: If you
kept track
of the data scientists collect
on climate
change, you would see diagrams
on everything
from temperature rise to glacial
melt. But
artist Jill Pelto sees something
even more
striking, and she takes those
stats and turns
them into vibrant watercolors.
We have a gallery
of those paintings on our home
page, PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Tuesday, we will look at how
opioid addictions
hold a deadly grip in many
states.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.